+++
bibfile = "kleroterio.json"
+++

This page attempts to formulate an "ideal" system of government based on a set of [[self-consistent]] "principles", starting from the most basic foundations. These principles mostly reflect standard theoretical understanding about the nature and role of government, also informed by an understanding of some key elements of human psychology and neuroscience.

The overall trajectory of the argument is to first develop a principled basis for understanding the motivations and nature of existing systems of representative electoral democracy, which is the dominant form of government for most people today, and has been elevated as a foundation of basic human rights by the [United Nations](https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Universal_Declaration_of_Human_Rights):

> Article 21.3: The will of the people shall be the basis of the authority of government; this will shall be expressed in periodic and genuine elections which shall be by universal and equal suffrage and shall be held by secret vote or by equivalent free voting procedures.

We then analyze the problems with this system of government in relation to the overall set of principles, and conclude that there are critical issues that are widely recognized, specifically with respect to the role of political parties in sowing strong divisions among the population, and the presence of systematic conflicts of interest in the position of an elected representative.

We conclude by introducing the principles of sortition-based government, and show how it avoids these systemic problems with representative electoral democracy, as summarized in the [[overview]].

The notion of "principles" and the use of numbers here is not intended to connote some kind of axiomatic linear derivation of formal logical reasoning. Instead, the numbers are just for convenience in subsequent referencing, and each such numbered principle is intended to capture one relatively coherent distinct idea that is then used as a building block in developing the subsequent steps in the argument. The principles are organized so that later ones reference earlier ones, and no major line of reasoning is advanced without referencing relevant earlier principles or well-established scientific data to substantiate it. Further, all principles so introduced are referenced at least once in later steps, so nothing is superfluous.

## Idealism and realism

{id="principle_idealism-realism" title="Idealism vs. realism"}
From the scientific perspective grounded in objective, reproducible data, people are animals composed of a large number of individual cells, which are further composed of various cellular mechanisms governed by the programs encoded in our DNA. This is reality. But we are also conscious beings with brains that support our ability to think and reason in the world of ideas. Understanding the tension between idealism and realism is essential for understanding how to best organize ourselves into societies of individuals working together, effectively forming a higher level organism composed of humans as "cells" in the "body public". Ideally, we can find a way of organizing ourselves that satisfies both reason and reality, while recognizing that reality will contradict many pure forms of idealism, but nevertheless it is important to strive toward ideals that have universal appeal and enable us to work together more productively and happily.

## Individual freedom and responsibility in the context of society

{id="principle_individual-society" title="Individual vs. society"}
The central conflict that must be managed by any government is between the individual and the larger society in which they live, and upon which their existence depends. The distinction between a notional conception of the _state of nature_ prior to or otherwise outside of the influence of society, and the constraints that society imposes, underlies political and social theorizing across many traditions, including Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, and modern philosophers including Rawls. Although these imagined conditions of nature have varied, it is useful to consider an idealized state of nature consisting of complete individual freedom, and consequently complete individual responsibility, as would be the case for a person living by themselves on a deserted island.

{id="principle_sovereign" title="Sovereign individuals"}
To minimize the costs imposed by society upon the individual, each person should be considered a _sovereign_ entity to the greatest extent possible (i.e., as in the imagined state of nature): each person is _responsible_ for their own decisions and actions, and is likewise _entitled_ to the greatest degree of _freedom_ possible in making these decisions and actions, limited only by the inevitable potential conflicts with others and the interests of the larger society. Thus, society must protect individuals from any unnecessary forms of control over their behavior (_freedom from_ or _negative liberty_; [[@Berlin58]]). This is the ideal associated with _libertarian_ political thought.

{id="principle_equality" title="Equality"}
A natural consequence of [[#principle_sovereign]] is that all individuals must have the same rights and responsibilities, and must all be subject to the same laws, regardless of _any_ individual characteristic (gender, race, religion, sexual orientation, job, governmental role, etc), i.e., the principle of fundamental _equality_. Any deviation from this fundamental equality would represent an infringement on the liberty of the class of disenfranchised individuals relative to others, and our instinctive sense of fairness reinforces the sense of harm this kind of systematic, codified inequality would produce.

**a.** The _sole_ exception to this equality condition is with respect to the mental capacity of the individual to make considered decisions that reflect a reasonable knowledge of the likely consequences, as assessed by the best currently available scientific methods, and with consideration of their maturational status, with 18 years of age the currently-accepted threshold for full adult-level responsibility.

{id="principle_sacrifice" title="Social benefits require sacrifice"}
The pure libertarian ideal articulated above is however insufficient. Each individual who chooses to live within a society must acknowledge that they directly _and indirectly_ benefit from the collective activity of the other members of this society. In order to sustain these collective benefits, individuals must inevitably sacrifice some measure of their individual freedom and resources. For example, each individual must contribute materially in the form of labor and / or money to support the society in which they live, at multiple levels, as determined by laws enacted by the different levels of government. This is reality infringing upon idealism: collective infrastructure benefits society as a whole, and it isn't free or magical: it must be paid for.

{id="principle_tradeoffs" title="Society must adjudicate fundamental tradeoffs"}
In the delicate balancing act between the individual and society ([[#principle_individual-society]]), and between idealism and realism ([[#principle-idealism-realism]]), there are many difficult tradeoffs, while some cases are more obvious. For example, it is clear that society should work to prevent one individual from causing direct physical harm to another, by enacting a system of laws that penalize such behavior. Furthermore, an individual's decisions or actions concerning the way they choose to express their thoughts, beliefs, or identity along any dimension must not be restricted by government, society or any other individual (i.e., freedom of speech and all other forms of expression), even if others may find them to be objectionable.

But what about the case where someone coerces or incites others to behave in a way that then leads to harming others, or that causes others to harm themselves? What about using drugs in a situation or to an extent that it could lead to harming others? It is the responsibility of the legal and legislative process within a society to adjudicate these conflicts in a manner consistent with idealistic principles and realistic constraints and impacts.

## Society is beyond our control

{id="principle_body-public" title="The body public"}
Society as the "body public" has a life of its own, and has an accumulated history of events and influences ("culture") that is beyond the control of any individual or even large groups of individuals. In other words, it is an _emergent_ phenomenon. Even the most powerful absolute dictator cannot fundamentally control their own society. Thus, any notion of power or control over society must be tempered by these fundamental limits: we cannot aspire to control the social environment in which we live, and must accept this further loss of individual _control_. This sense of individual control over our own destinies can be considered a distinct, _positive_ form of liberty as contrasted with the _freedom from_ infringement on our individual liberties ([[@Berlin58]]), and it is perhaps more impacted by the constraints of realism.

Specifically, most individuals do not actively choose the society in which they live, in the same way that we cannot choose our own parents. We are born into certain circumstances beyond our control. No individual specifically determined the outcomes of all the decisions that their society took prior to their coming of adult age, nor will they have any direct, individual control over decisions made throughout their lifetime. Thus, relative to the notional state of complete individual freedom and responsibility in "nature", people in society are actually more akin to the cells in our own bodies. We are parts of a greater whole, and our fate is intertwined with that of our society in ways that are entirely beyond our individual control. Acceptance of these facts is part of the bargain we make with society; in principle any individual could decide instead to go live on a deserted island, if they refuse to accept this bargain.

## People are different

{id="principle_differences" title="People are different"}
The principle of equality cannot be applied to everything in society. Each individual has a unique combination of genetics and life history, and is born into unique circumstances going back through the great chain of being of our ancestors, and their ancestors, and so on. All of these unique characteristics and circumstances are going to produce significant differences in life outcomes. I might want to be a rock star but I can't sing or play guitar worth a damn, so tough luck for me -- I better find something else to do. Likewise, many people have no interest in becoming a politician, and many people would probably suck at that job too.

The challenge of how to reconcile the reality of these individual differences with the idealistic principle of _equality_ is reflected in the major differences across the left-right spectrum of different political parties and schools of thought. Should society be organized to minimize these individual differences, with the goal of at least establishing some kind of equality of _opportunity_ across individuals? Or should individual liberty be maximized by just ignoring these differences in a _laissez faire_ approach? Answers to these questions have consequences for the size and role of government.

{id="principle_social-health" title="Maximizing social health"}
One approach to these difficult questions is to look to nature for possible answers. Specifically, in the way that the cells in our own individual bodies are organized to work together to accomplish that most valuable of outcomes: our very existence as organisms on this planet. Every type of cell plays a different role, and the body would not function without these differences, in the same way that society would not function if everyone tried to be a rock star. Although the differentiation of cells into their specific roles is far more deterministic in the body, the same principle applies to people: we are all constantly trying to find a place for ourselves in society that satisfies our needs and desires, and those of society itself.

Critically, the body provides for a "universal basic income" (i.e., blood and oxygen) and a "right to basic health care" (the immune system etc) for all of its cells, except in cases of extreme depravation or disease. It is not beneficial for overall health and bodily function to cut off support to significant numbers of cells. However, the body also demands the ultimate sacrifice of cell death on a regular basis, to renew various tissues and provide the dead skin cells for protection.

Therefore, we probably don't want to copy every detail of how our bodies function, but rather the general principle that we should organize society so as to promote the best overall health and vitality of the social organism, subject to relevant idealistic constraints (i.e., honoring individual freedom to the extent possible, per [[#principle_sovereign]]) and with an overall recognition that 100% efficiency and optimization is an impossible goal. In other words, some kind of middle-ground compromise like those already in place in most modern industrialized democracies is probably a reasonable place to be, providing a sufficient basic safety net while people figure out where they fit into society, while recognizing that significant differences in wealth are inevitable.

{id="principle_outsourcing" title="Cultural outsourcing"}
The broader principle that "not everyone can be a rock star" can be termed _cultural outsourcing_: it is  rational from an economic / resource perspective for people to rely on other members of the society for the vast majority of the relevant knowledge, skills, and expertise required to make society work ([[@SlomanFernbach18]]); it would be massively inefficient for everyone to spend the time to learn about everything that society knows. Interestingly, [[@^SlomanFernbach18]] document considerable research showing that people have the illusion of knowing things that they have actually outsourced to others. For example, people think they know how their car works, but when pressed, typically fail to articulate even the most basic principles. Thus, we automatically incorporate the broader community of knowledge in society into our own sense of understanding. And as long as there are people who actually know how to design, build, and repair cars, then nobody is typically the wiser, and you go about your life driving your car without really knowing how it works.

{id="principle_tribalism" title="Tribalism"}
Our brains are wired by evolution to strongly distinguish between those within our "tribe" (the _in-group_) and "others" that constitute the _out-group_. We exhibit group-selection level behaviors of _altruism_ and _self-sacrifice_ for members of our in-group (e.g., members of the military willing to die for their country; [[#principle_sacrifice]]), while exhibiting precisely the opposite behaviors toward the out-group (hate, killing, dehuminization, etc). These powerful forces are what holds a society together, and when they fractionate, "a house divided against itself, cannot stand" in the famous words of President Abraham Lincoln. The necessity of differentiation within society means that the raw ingredients for these divisions are ever present, and thus it is of the utmost importance for a society to constantly work towards establishing a strong in-group that encompasses all members of the society in a cohesive whole.

Populist political movements typically obtain their power by manipulating the raw power of our tribalism instincts, pitting one group against another in order to generate the strong emotional bonds among the in-group, but inevitably creating strong and counter-productive divisions with other out-groups within society. The sheer strength of these instincts is evident in the kinds of horrors that such movements have wrought, with the paradigmatic example being Nazi Germany in the 1930's and 40's. Somehow, people still fail to recognize the proper source of power behind such movements, and falsely attribute magical powers to the leaders of such movements, who often seem "invincible" and beyond the reach of conventional political forces. The true source of this power lies within our brainstems, and it is truly a ticking time bomb within the heart of all societies that fail to properly direct and contain this primal force.

## The purpose and nature of government

"If people were angels, then no government would be necessary" -- James Madison, Federalist 51

{id="principle_necessity" title="Necessity for government"}
Government is necessary because conflicts between individuals, and with the interests of society, are inevitable. In the absence of a government founded on laws and established procedures for enforcing them, such conflicts ultimately favor those with physical strength and weapons (i.e., "might makes right"). This is in direct conflict with the fundamental _equality_ principle ([[#principle_equality]]), and no stable and thriving society can be based on such a fundamental inequality. Furthermore, government is necessary to organize the collective efforts of individuals toward greater safety and prosperity of society as a whole.

{id="principle_self-interest" title="Limiting runaway self-interest"}
Individuals are inevitably driven by self interest, and we now know a great deal about the mechanisms in the brain that result in an insatiable drive for _more_ (i.e., greed). Furthermore, there are inevitable _positive feedback loops_ (i.e., "the rich get richer") that emerge within societies, that enable this individual greed to materially impair the overall health of a society, in conflict with [[#principle_social-health]]. For example, monopolies are widely recognized as bad for society, and government action is necessary to intervene and break up such monopolies when they occur. Likewise, there are a number of well-documented problems that arise in a society with extreme inequalities in wealth distribution, so overall social health can be improved by intervening in these rich-get-richer dynamics as well.

Thus, any viable system of government must be organized to mitigate the impacts of these factors, to produce an _efficient_ and _effective_ system that maximizes the benefits to all members of society. Consistent with the primacy of individual freedom and responsibility, in cases where the results of greedy self-interest converge with those of society (e.g., in terms of the efficiency of free market economics), this is a win-win scenario that should be nurtured wherever possible. However, when these forces are in conflict with the broader public interest, government is a "necessary evil" ([[#principle_necessity]]), which must seek the most efficient and effective ways to mitigate these conflicts, protecting the fundamental rights of all citizens. Adjudicating these challenging tradeoffs is among the most difficult and important functions of a government ([[#principle_tradeoffs]]).

{id="principle_legitimacy" title="Legitimacy from equality"}
The universal principle of equality ([[#principle_equality]]) should be the foundation for the _legitimacy_ of a system of government: the system must treat each person equally with respect to the process by which decisions are made for the society as a whole. This moral sense of legitimacy is critical for creating a positive attitude about the government, so that they are willing to live within it, and potentially fight to the death to defend it. Note that this does not imply that each citizen must actually participate equally in practice: as discussed in [[#principle_differences]], the equality principle is about the nature of the laws, not the actual outcomes. We'll have much more to say about this in the next section.

{id="principle_efficacy" title="Legitimacy from efficacy"}
Another major source of legitimacy derives from the overall efficacy of the government: its ability to keep its citizens happy, prosperous, and safe. Empirically, it seems that people are sometimes willing to sacrifice the principle of equality in exchange for the promise of greater efficacy, and there is this idealized notion of a "benevolent dictator" who makes all the right decisions and is much more capable and effective than an alternative mechanism that is much slower and inefficient, as a democratic process often is. It is likely that our evolutionary instincts include some kind of expectation of being led by an "alpha" individual, given the prevalence of this structure in apes and most other animal social structures (e.g., wolf packs) ([[@Waal07]]). This can help explain why most of recorded human history has been dominated by monarchies, and why we appear so willing to give up on systems of government based on rational principles such as equality.

## Democracy

{id="principle_democracy" title="Direct democracy as an ideal"}
For most people at the present time, _democracy_ is the "obvious" form of equality-based legitimacy ([[#principle_legitimacy]]), where every citizen is entitled to the right to vote, and each person's vote counts the same (we need not dwell on the many historical and current-day violations of this principle here) ([[@Dahl08]], [[@Dahl20]]). 

It follows naturally that the "optimal" form of democracy is _direct democracy_, where each individual citizen directly participates in making all the relevant decisions. However, this immediately collides with the reality that such a system is simply impractical for many reasons, even in the most idealized scenario where you have some kind of electronic system that allows everyone to participate remotely in the most efficient way possible. The core problem is that it just takes way too much time to properly learn about and rationally consider the relevant issues, and it is massively inefficient for a society to require all of its citizens to be involved in everything. This is an instance of the rational need for _cultural outsourcing_ ([[#principle_outsourcing]]).

{id="principle_representative" title="Representative electoral democracy"}
Cultural outsourcing drives the necessity of _representative_ democracy, where a small subset of elected representatives are chosen to make decisions on the behalf of the rest of the citizens, in the same way that we rely on other members of society for just about everything else. This form of democracy brings with it a number of additional issues, that have led to a number of different critiques, which we summarize here within the context of the above principles.

The overall conclusion is that representative electoral democracy has systematic, inevitable flaws, that motivate the desire to explore alternative systems. However, it is essential to foreclose the idea that direct democracy is the solution to these problems. Anyone who has attempted to make sense of various ballot initiatives knows how frustrating and impractical it is for random uninformed citizens to try to make decisions on the complexities of real-world issues. Cultural outsourcing is not a mere convenience: it is an absolute necessity, without which society at all levels would not function.

**a.** Elected representatives violate the principle of equality, making this system inherently _aristocratic_ or _elitist_. This is a common critique going back to the time of ancient Athens. Interestingly, some have seen this as a virtue, including James Madison and other framers of the US constitution, who thought that the responsibility of making decisions on behalf of society should only be entrusted to a more "enlightened" set of individuals. Per [[#principle_differences]] above, the idealistic notion that all citizens are somehow equal in all respects is not realistic. Indeed, most people in democratic societies hold their elected representatives to higher standards, seeking to select the "best of us" to lead, because we know that these people will have more power, and therefore we try to elect people who we think will use that power wisely and in our best interests.

**b.** Voting for a representative does not give sufficient power to the people. For example, [[@^Shoemaker24]] analyzes several different theories of democratic rule and finds them all wanting because none appear to support the ability of individual citizens to collectively "rule society". First, per [[#principle_body-public]], there are significant limitations in the extent to which society can be ruled even under the strongest forms of authoritarian government. Second, Shoemaker does not seem to give proper weight to the idea that voting gives us the ability to vote someone out of office who betrays our confidence in them, and doesn't appear to act in our best interests. We are in charge because we can decide to fire our leaders, and we are therefore, ultimately, the "boss". This _accountability_ element of voting is the essential foundation for the legitimacy of electoral representative democracy, and as long as elections remain reasonably fair, open, and competitive, it seems to at least minimally satisfy most people that this form of government is better than other alternatives.

**c.** Another function attributed to voting is to provide some kind of explicit _consent_ to the actions taken by elected representatives. However, this line of reasoning is undermined by the fact that the majority of the laws and practices of an established government were not in any way consented to by the voting patterns of an individual in their lifetime. Furthermore, the connection between a vote and the subsequent actions of an elected representative are often tenuous (this being a major failing of the electoral system in the first place, discussed below), to say nothing of the actions of the representative you didn't vote for.

{id="principle_red-tribal" title="Representative democracy promotes tribalism"}
The first severe problem with representative electoral democracy ([[#principle_representative]]) is the inevitable emergence of political parties to support the election of individual candidates, which thus aggravates our _tribalism_ instincts in conflict with [[#principle_tribalism]]. The framers of the US constitution recognized these problems with political parties, and attempted to design a system without their influence (e.g., Hamilton's _Federalist 9_ and Madison's _Federalist 10_).

However, parties soon emerged, for the inevitable reason that individual candidates benefit substantially from the resources and labor provided by a political party. Once you have parties in place, they naturally create "identity politics" that engage our strong instincts for group affiliation, and inevitably this amplifies divisions within society, and drives dehumanization of members of other political parties, as we readily observe in modern day politics. Although we tend to think of this as a more recent trend given the intensity of current divisions, especially within the US, it is important to appreciate that these strong divisions have always been present, and again were a major source of concern to the framers of the US constitution in the late 1700's.

Parties also impair the overall efficacy of government ([[#principle_efficacy]]) by impeding the kinds of compromises that are necessary to solve practical problems. Representatives who collaborate with members of the opposite party are viewed as traitors, and are increasingly subject to various threats of punishment from their party. Thus, in the US in particular, pragmatic solutions to increasingly pressing problems have failed to progress through the legislature due to this party warfare mentality. This results in further erosion of the public confidence in the efficacy of government, increasing the appeal of more authoritarian regimes that promise decisive action.

{id="principle_red-coi" title="Representative democracy has systematic conflicts of interest"}
Elected representatives have significant, systematic conflicts of interest that cause them to fail to represent the interests of the people. As discussed in [[#principle_self-interest]], it is critical for government to intervene in cases of systematic conflicts of interest between individuals and overall social interests. The clear self-interest of the elected representative is to get re-elected, and thus it is inevitable that they spend significant time and effort on this objective, and on helping members of their parties get re-elected. This typically includes a strong consideration of fundraising in ways that inevitably influence their judgement on decisions that affect wealthy donors and corporations.

Although there are various laws (which recently have been significantly weakened in the US) to try to mitigate these conflicts of interest, a common source of dissatisfaction among members of democratic societies is that their representatives inevitably serve the interests of rich corporations and people, at the expense of the broader population.

{id="principle_red-choice" title="Limitations on available choices"}
The logic of representative electoral democracy hinges critically on the availability of "good" options for the public to vote for, and the lack of such options is an oft-cited complaint. The ability to hold the current representatives accountable by voting them out of office is rendered impotent if the only other options are equally problematic.

Political parties are a major source of the problem here too, because they strongly constrain the process by which viable candidates end up on the ballot, and the number of such candidates in the first place. In the US, the two-party system is particularly constraining. While multi-party parlimentary style democracies typically provide more options, there are often only a couple of major parties that have any prospect of actually coming into power. Because parties and their candidates depend so much on fundraising, they often end up selecting candidates that the public regards as being largely indistinguishable, with nobody clearly representing their specific interests. 

In summary, the famous words of Winston Churchill, that "democracy is the worst form of Government except for all those other forms that have been tried" ([[@Churchill47]]) provide an apt conclusion to our evaluation of representative electoral democracy according to the above principles. Most people recognize this system as the most morally legitimate form of government by virtue of the formal equality of each person's vote ([[#principle_democracy]]), and the ultimate power of accountability to the voters, but they also recognize that it suffers from a number of longstanding and seemingly intractable problems.

## Sortition

{id="principle_sortition" title="Random selection without elections"}
Given the strong constraint of needing to select a small set of representatives to make decisions on the behalf of the rest of the population, which is imposed by the principle of cultural outsourcing ([[#principle_outsourcing]]), the only other method of selection that also satisfies the strong constraint of formal equality is _random selection_ (i.e., _sortition_). If every citizen has the same random chance of being selected to serve (and they are confident in the unbiased nature of this selection process, which the  Kleroterion device in ancient Athens provided; see the [[overview]]), then surely nobody can object to such a system on the basis of equality. Furthermore, a principle of sortition is that each person only ever serves once, to increase the chances of others being able to serve, and to eliminate any structural imbalances in the composition of the sortition panel.

Critically, random selection has the additional advantage of eliminating the need for elections, and consequently the need for political parties to provide resources for such elections. Thus, a sortition-based government thereby eliminates the significant problems that arise from political parties and the systematic conflicts of interest that arise from elections. However, does it also suffer from other problems that might otherwise dim the prospects for this form of government?

**a.** Sortition lacks accountability and consent. As emphasized above, one of the primary virtues of voting is that it provides ultimate accountability in the hands of the voting public. If there are no elections, clearly this eliminates the prospect of such accountability. Some consider this to be a critical flaw. First, we can easily deal with the issue of consent as discussed above: much of what a government does occurs without explicit consent of the current voting population in one way or another anyway, and it is really unclear how any consent-based approach would actually work (would each new election involve votes of consent for everything already in place?). As for accountability, the fact that each randomly-selected representative only serves once, often for a very brief period, strongly mitigates this concern.

Indeed, the random nature of sortition selection puts the entire role of the selected representative into an entirely different light relative to someone who is explicitly seeking to be elected. What ulterior motive would such a randomly-selected person have, other than to best represent their own perceived interests and those of the broader society in which they live? This purity of purpose strongly contrasts with the systematic conflicts of interest present in the electoral system, and thus strongly reduces the need for accountability.

**b.** Sortition lacks the _broad participation_ that is critical for the legitimacy of electoral democracy (e.g., [[@Fishkin18]]). It is difficult to evaluate this concern without more direct attempts to assess how prevalent and strong it might be, but at least we can assess it relative to the above principles. First, the basic distinction between equality as a formal property of the law ([[#principle_equality]]), vs. actual real-world equality of outcomes ([[#principle_differences]]) suggests that it is much more important that sortition assign an equal chance for every eligible citizen. It seems straightforward for people to recognize that they might not have a chance to participate in a sortition panel, in the same way they may never be called for jury duty, and in the same way that they never aspired to be a politician. Likewise, the arguments about consent apply here: people already have to accept the vast amount of already-decided laws etc. Fundamentally, this is the constraint of [[#cultural_outsourcing]] that people already readily accept for everything else about society.

For the above reasons, if this issue of broad participation does end up being a problem, it may be more effective to focus on discussion and education, rather than on trying to somehow get a large portion of the population involved in sortition panels of some kind. As [[@^Fishkin25]] notes, the fact that you might serve on some random panel deciding one random issue (which you might not care much about) likely does little to assuage any concerns about the judgement of the random panel who made a decision you disagree with on an issue you do care about. As established in [[#principle_body-public]] and again in [[#principle_outsourcing]], it is simply impossible for any individual to expect to have any significant control over the collective behavior of the society the live in, and this is just something that people have to learn to accept one way or another.

The key mitigating factor here is the extent to which the society upholds [[#principle_sovereign]] and the _freedom from_ infringement on an individual's basic rights and liberties, so that they should not experience undue impediments to the pursuit of their own individual goals from the society in which they live. At the end of the day, this basic bulwark of liberty is what keeps the population happy, even when they might disagree with various directions the broader society is going.

Thus, although most people are generally comfortable with the principle of voting as the primary mechanism of democratic legitimacy, it is unclear if attempts to justify the necessity of voting really hold up against these various counterarguments. Our position is that there is much to be gained, and little of fundamental value lost, in giving up the vote, in favor of random selection. Nevertheless, conducting broad empirical studies to assess people's actual judgments on these issues is of the utmost urgency to establish the overall viability of the approach.


